- fast forwards to the darkness
[Music]
[Applause]
welcome to slash forward the channel
that provides summarization and
commentary of all your favorite popular
and obscure horror movies in this video
we're gonna take a look at the dissents
a 2005 film by Neil Marshall who's best
known for basically this movie but he
has some good credits but I'm not sure
any of them were more popular than the
dissents but that's okay I've been
thinking about this film ever since I
mentioned it in the description of a
quiet place and I wanted to verify my
claim that this is one of the most
atmospheric horror films of the last 15
years we'll talk about that more at the
end for now let's check out the movie
we opened on Beth Sarah and Juno three
ladies of adventure doing some
whitewater rafting even though one of
them takes the ill-advised move of
coming off the side of the raft into the
bottom they make it through all smiles
and uncrushed coxey's degrees at the end
point by Sierra's daughter and husband
who after some rambunctious lady ribbing
shows some extra care and attention to
Juneau while cruising through woodland
roads on their way back to civilization
Sarah's husband Shirley reminiscing upon
a prior midnight liaison with Juno
accidentally crosses the center line and
promptly takes a stack of copper rods to
the face an accident that unfortunately
also kills their daughter Sarah wakes up
in the hospital instead of hitting her
call buzzer she immediately begins
ripping out all of her life my during
medical devices
it gets literally foreshadowed down the
hallway where she runs into Beth and
learns about the outcome of the wreck we
find out that she's not actually by
herself she's in the middle of a crowded
hospital full of people who don't seem
to mind that she's having a breakdown
for some reason and cut to one year
later who provided ample evidence that
Beth and Sarah are now in the United
States sweet Jesus how dare you they
finished their woodland drive at a cabin
where Juno has been waiting for them
along with large crew of rowdy
adventure-seeking ladies they proceeded
to do all the things that ladies do when
they're demonstrating to an audience
that they're having a good time in
service of the character-building
portion of the plot they laugh at what's
supposed to be an embarrassing photo but
it looks almost exactly like them now
light-hearted insults
[Laughter]
[Music]
what about you Holly got a man Oh
sportsbook like Juna
well that was crass the next morning
they take a group photo and head out to
what has been described as a tourist
attraction spelunking adventure do you
know there's only one road so just
follow it when they arrive were given
evidence that they're not exactly where
Juna said they would be going which
should have been immediately noticed as
this area is rugged and secluded and
looks nothing like an underground
souvenir shop as was previously
described a little more foreshadowing
some beautiful cinematography and
another dress no I'm good serie goes off
to investigate in noise and is treated
to another jump scare then they find the
next passage it looks like this serie
gets stuck and Beth wonders what do you
mean do you see what's happening right
now after working their way through the
passage caves in requiring the group to
find another way out this is where we
get official confirmation that they are
indeed in an uncharted cave and that
their pre-registered playing with the
local park services office is
essentially useless they are completely
on their own they have no choice but to
travel deeper into the crevasse in order
to come out on the other side they make
it across an opening in a tense sequence
that makes my hands and feet sweat Holly
thinks she sees daylight and goes
tearing off down the cave only to
promptly fall down a pit
she suffers a simple open compound
fracture to the knee this requires
everyone to join her down below rather
than continue on at the upper levels so
thanks a lot how it Sarah goes off to
explore another noise while Holly gets
ready to bite the towel on a brutal
frontier medicine style bone setting
scenes Sarah definitely here's another
noise and sees something in the darkness
but she can't convince anyone else's
she's not been touched with the case of
the cave madness there's nothing the
group finds themselves in a natural
ossuary when they come to meet their
first crawler up close then quickly
climbs off into the darkness it circles
back jumps carrying the group yet again
and then noms on Holly's neck the group
splits off in the confusion and Sarah
takes a fall net knocks her out
temporarily judo sticks behind to try to
save Holly and successfully injures two
crawlers unfortunately one of them
manages to abscond with Holly's body and
Juno is so geared up that she
accidentally acts as Beth Sarah wakes up
in a human boneyard just in time to have
Holly's body dropped in front of her
giving her a front-row seat to a feeding
[Music]
luckily the crawlers being adapted to
cave life have poor vision so Sierra
just has to wait them out as they
consume her friend inches away once
they've cleared the area she fashions a
torch and looks for a way out meanwhile
Rebecca learning something from the
earlier parts of the movie she attempts
to create her own jump-scare scenario
but fails miserably this leads to a
limp-wristed flail off with the crawler
at this point Juno jumps in to take care
of business
the ladies talk about the biology of the
crawlers confirming their poor vision
and pieced together evidence from their
journey so far to conclude that the
crawlers must hunt for prey on the
surface at night indicating that there's
an alternative exit somewhere in the
area Sara finds Beth who's somehow still
alive and can somehow still talk
Beth gives Sara a memento she swiped
from Juno and warns Sara not to trust
her the trinket connects Juno intimately
to Sarah's husband supporting Beth's
story about how she got her neck
ventilated and also indicating the
aforementioned carnal familiarity of
Juno and Sarah's husband now fully
transmogrified from a delicate piece of
porcelain to a crime evil hard-ass Sara
quickly grants Beth a mercy killing and
it begins calling the crawler her as the
survivors realize they're being
surrounded they decided to make an
all-out run for it at this point we
don't really expect anything to work out
as intended as they make their way
across the void little sisters
immediately attacked by a crawler she
manages to take it out and then die in
an incredibly melodramatic way
immediately after this big sister is
administered the mother of all servers
leaving Juno stuck in the middle of
nowhere to go she ends up taking a dive
and luckily finds water this leads to a
reunion of Sara and Juno for the finale
the final sequence is an all-out
no-holds-barred grudge match where I
gang and groin kicks are encouraged
leading to an incredibly gory outcome
after clearing the first wave Sara
hobbles Juno and leaves her as bait so
she can make an escape attempt she shows
no mercy for this homewrecker Sara finds
a mound of bones that leads to freedom
and quickly runs up to it and she books
it out of there back to the car and
after a good cry and little purge we get
a quick shot of ghost you know followed
by a twist ending we see that Sara is
still in the cave imagining she's
celebrating her daughter's birthday
while their friends are being
slaughtered around her this original
ending was actually deemed too bleak for
us audiences so it was cut for theaters
but it didn't matter because the edge er
ending for the foreign audiences was
ultimately retcon to allow for a sequel
that centers around Sarah returned into
the cave
[Music]
for the extra piece of this video we're
gonna have a brief discussion of Neil
Marshalls effective use of jump-scares
to create a sense of overwhelming dread
as I mentioned at the beginning this
film is notable for its intense
claustrophobic atmosphere similarly to a
quiet place that uses periods of
quietness and normally punctuated by
intense action or loud noises to draw
the viewer in and help them empathize
with the characters both movies do this
incredibly effectively but with very
different methods a quiet place is more
of a story driven film where the periods
of punctuated intensity are connected
through strong pacing a tight plot and
an unfolding familial drama that the
audience is fully invested in due to the
strength of the character development
conversely the descent has less
developed characters and weaker group
bonds pulling us in but makes up for
this by interspersing the intense parts
with expertly shot sequences of
claustrophobia these characters are not
just running through caves they are
descending through narrow channels
submerging themselves through shallow
pools and water while carrying gear
climbing over dark voids and so on it
feels like they could snag on something
or get stuck at any moment there's a
constant risk of slow aggravating death
the characters do not have to be as
felon overall because there are feelings
for the viewer Marshall uses the
atmosphere to create a fully realized
environment within which viewers can
place themselves and in the case of this
movie this is pulled off almost
flawlessly in addition to this technique
it really struck me when I watched the
movie this time how effective the jump
scares are usually Joe scares are used
as a cheap trick to ramp up the
experience of watching and otherwise
mediocre to bad movie it tend to be
unnecessary and provide no payoff I will
say that there were many more jump
scares in the descent than I expected
but they don't appear to have any of
these flaws there's one jump scare in
particular that I clearly remembered
from prior viewings of the movie I
declined to show it in a summary because
it's just that good if you're gonna
watch the movie you've never seen it
before you should go into it unprepared
it's the epitome of an effective and
useful jump scare so what about all the
others well when I watch the movie this
time that pinnacle jump scare didn't
actually have that much of an effect on
me because it previously left such as
and pressure the scene is burned into my
memory I knew exactly when it was coming
what to expect of it I did forget
basically every other jump skier in the
movie it was actually surprised at how
many there are in the earlier sequences
especially before any of the actual
descending takes place on their face
these may seem like cheap or unnecessary
attempts to spice up the boring plot
building parts of the movie but I don't
think they fall into that category
what I came to realize was that while
the primary jump-scare didn't actually
scare me I still had a consistent
feeling of anxiety throughout the movie
the other jump scares weren't there to
make a scary movie out of what otherwise
would have been a not so scary movie
they were building and creating a sense
of dread and connection with the
audience preparing them to have a strong
emotional and physical reaction to what
they were about to watch making me feel
feelings enhanced my connection to what
was happening on the screen as a result
this movie can be viewed as a
masterclass and effectively utilizing
space to build atmosphere in tension and
using seemingly innocuous techniques
like the occasional jump scare to
manipulate the emotional state of the
audience priming them to feel strongly
about future events within the movie and
providing them with a more interactive
viewing experience
[Music]